Welcome back everyone.
So in the last few lessons we've learned about making some performance optimizations.
We learned how to use react lazy in order to lazy load our components into our application.
We learned how to handle code splitting at the root level by using these lazy loaded components with
react router and then wrapping them in react suspense so that we always had a fallback UI in case these
components did not fully render or get retrieve from the back end server.
By the time we needed them we also learned how to build our boundary components in order to provide
yet another piece of fallback UI in case anything goes wrong inside of the child components of the airy
boundary components that we created.
So we've learned a lot already about improving the user experience of our application already and the
main thing of performance to remember is that we only need to do these things in order to improve the
end user experience optimizations for the sake of optimizations is really an empty goal in itself.
So this harks back to what I mentioned in the first lesson of the section which is that you must measure
and you must consider the tradeoffs when making optimizations and you only want to make performance
improvements when you hit a problem now.
In this section I'm going to actually teach you some react component level optimizations and I really
want you to think about this because we're going to explore some examples as to why you don't want to
get too eager or too aggressive with over optimizations you really want to take a step back and consider
why you're making this optimization in the first place and you want to think about the overall context
of what it is that you're improving.
So let's get right to it now.
What I want to do is actually go back to our life cycles method lesson and really rethink about this
one specific life cycle method was what should component update if we go back to the code inside of
our lifecycle component.
If you remember there was this lifecycle method that we had access to on our class components called
should component update which received the next prompts and the next date that was coming in to a component
a class component to be particular specific where we would be able to compare the next prompts and the
next state against the current prompts and the current state to decide whether or not we wanted to return
true or false which would then dictate whether or not this component would re render.
This was done in order to save us on unnecessary renders if the prompts were going to come in the same.
Now why would this be important.
Well this is literally a performance optimization because saving ourselves on re renders is most likely
the biggest optimization we can generally do when it comes to the speed and performance of a component
but US manually writing this is great if we need this level of granularity but there is an easier way
for us to do this and the way we do it is to use two different types of new functions and classes that
we get from react and replace our existing reactor components or our existing functional components.
So I'll show you what those are.
In this lesson now what I've done is I've created this person component just to demonstrate to us rendering
cycle so we have this person that is a functional component.
It takes a person object as a prop and it simply returns a div with the person name and the person age
and it logs rendering whenever it gets rendered inside of our objects we have our app component we import
in this person component.
I just wrote and what we do is we have a count on the state and then we have inside of our components
simply a button that whenever you click will increase the count but also we have the button count display
now above this component.
I'm going to put our new person component and what I'm going to do is I'm going to pass in the person
property by passing an object inside of the render here manually.
Where name goes to Jack.
And age goes to twenty two now because I'm in line defining this object you will see something interesting
when ever we actually end up rendering this component.
Now I want you to take a second and think how many times do you think ah person component is going to
end up calling rendering if what you guessed was more than once then you would be correct.
So when our application mounted for the first time we mounted AR person component and rendering was
long but you'll see that every time I increase this button count that component is actually getting
re rendered.
And the reason for this is because when ever set state gets called inside of our component our app component
we end up re rendering everything which means that a new person is going past in to the person component.
Now you might think if I move this object into the state what this actually mean that I saved myself
on some renders Well this actually isn't going to work either.
So if we d structure a person and we move it onto the state will notice that when we pass it in whenever
we increase the count we're still re rendering.
And the reason for this is because this component is a functional component and a functional component
will always re render whenever the parent renders because the functional component simply does not know
it's essentially being called and invoked every time on render to provide us with a new component.
So that's one thing to remember.
The next thing is that how would we actually save ourselves on these re renders.
Well here's the way that we can check so the first thing what we want to do is see how much time it
actually costs us to re render this person and what we can do is actually download in our ReACT dev
tools.
If you have not already so react dev tools as an extension that the web browser provides and here you'll
see that we actually have it already installed on my chrome browser.
If you don't have it just simply use the link that I've provided and then add it to your chrome once
you've added it to your chrome browser you're able to access it by going to this react button inside
of the top bar that lets you switch between different views inside of your dev tools now inside of here.
We'll find that we have access to our application tree where we have the right name associated to our
components instead of the actual rendered elements we see when we typically go to our elements.
So if we had divs we would see them as divs if we had p tags whatever but inside of the react profile
here we actually see the right name for the right components but instead of focusing on that we want
to look at the profiler because the profiler will tell us how many times components were rendered and
how much time it took for them to actually get placed on the page.
So if I hit this record button and I start clicking my button it's tracking all of them and when I stop
it you'll see here what looks like a timeline.
Now this timeline actually represents what it is that these components took in order to render so let's
look at our person component for example.
So we know that our app component of course gotta be rendered but so did our person component.
If we look at it we'll see up here in this bar.
It actually shows us these elements every time you click it.
It advances through that chain and it tells us how many renders actually happen here and the total number
of renders.
And every time it rendered what were the prompts that got passed into a person component.
The interesting thing is if you hit this icon here it actually tells you the total amount of time each
render took.
So the initial mount of course took longer than the end up subsequent re renders because the initial
mount as I mentioned mounting is the most expensive because it's a dom required change whereas re rendering
simply changes the values inside of the actual note but it doesn't have to create a new Dom node whereas
here you'll see that these are faster to render but we still had to spend half a millisecond every time
we increase the button count.
But despite that fact our props never changed so we actually are costing our application quite a bit
on these renders.
Now how do we actually improve this.
Well this is where we can actually improve our person component by using react memo reactive memo is
a way for us to memorize this component so that the component does not re render.
If the props values do not change now what do I mean by this.
Well just like with our shared component update lifecycle method on our actual class components react
memo does the exact same thing as implementing a shallow comparison.
That should component update does for our class component and in a similar way using racked up memo
on our functional components allows our new component to check the old props against the new props to
see if the value has changed.
Now what this means is that in order for us to use it we wrap our component with react memo like a higher
order component which will memorize the actual component.
Very similar to re-elect when we memorize our selectors.
The only difference is that it checks to make sure that the actual object values have not changed at
the root level which is a shallow comparison.
We'll talk more about the shell comparison a little later.
Let's actually first see what happens.
So now if we look at our app Jess we're still passing in our person from our state and now we'll see
that whenever we actually increase that count we're not rendering anymore.
In fact to prove it.
We can go back to our ReACT profiler.
We can refresh our page and now if we start profiling and I start increasing the count here we'll see
that our person simply got rendered the one time and it never rendered any more times during the recorded
time other than the initial amount.
Now the initial mount occurred before we actually started our profiler.
Therefore we don't see any of those renders because none of them exist.
Our components simply mounted the first time to render and that was it so we can see how that actually
helps us out because now we have improved the actual performance of our component.
But the question is how much did it improve it by.
Well in order for us to see that time we do need to actually profile the initial mount so we can do
that by making a slight change to our code here.
So I'll simply add a show person toggle value of initially false and make sure that we set show person
here
and dynamically decide whether or not to show this person component based on our state value of show
person.
And then I'm going to make a new button that says toggle
and all it does is it sets the state where show person is equal to the opposite value.
So nothing new here.
I'm simply just toggling this value now what happens is that we don't initially see our person I'm going
to start recording our profiler I'm going to toggle it on and then I'm going to click increased count.
Stop it and now we'll see that we've actually got our initial render time which is one point five milliseconds.
So that's how long it took for our component to mount our person component.
Now however if I remove this react memo how much time do you think it actually takes to render the person
the first time not the subsequent times but just the first time if we start profiling and again and
we target a person and we stop we see that the initial mount was one point three milliseconds which
is faster than when we used our ReACT memo.
The reason for this is because the initial memorization of our component takes longer than just simply
passing that component itself.
So this is a thing you got to remember is that everything comes with a cost.
Every optimization that we make does come with a cost.
Even implementing should a component update because this means that our class component has a new life
cycle method that has to run every time prompts or state changes.
This is important because if you have components that don't take props then you there's no need to actually
memorize them.
In fact if you have components that don't modify state or don't need the lifecycle methods or rarely
change their props at all.
Then there is also no reason to memorize them.
So this is a thing to remember you always want to be measuring to see whether or not your components
are actually performing faster in the grand scheme of things.
Because if we start memorizing all of our components without thinking about the context in which they
are used we'll actually end up with a slower application as a whole so the alternative to using reactive
memo for a class component is react up here component and this is essentially the same thing as implementing
a should component update method where we're able to compare next props to props and next state to state
it just simply does it for you under the hood so you don't have to implement it yourself.
Very similar to our ReACT memo except of course react memo is for functional components because they
don't have local state.
So these are just things to keep in mind with these actual new versions of instantiating components
that we can use to optimize our components.
But again context is the most important thing in the next lesson we're going to talk about the shallow
comparison and more considerations about how that might affect our application.
So we'll talk about that in the next lesson.